README.md, before:

# sunce

`sunce` is a command-line application for computing topocentric solar coordinates and solar events such as sunrise, sunset, transit, and twilight. It is designed for scripting and bulk processing: the tool supports time series, geographic sweeps, file input, and streaming, and produces machine-friendly output (CSV or JSON Lines) for use in data pipelines. Built on the [solar-positioning](https://crates.io/crates/solar-positioning) library of high-accuracy solar position algorithms.

## Status

This project aims to be a drop-in replacement for the Java-based [solarpos](https://github.com/klausbrunner/solarpos) tool while benefiting from Rust's performance and distribution advantages. While the core functionality is stable and extensively tested with compatibility validation against solarpos, the tool hasn't seen much user testing yet.

## Use cases

- **Solar-energy operations** – compute sun angles and event times for panel tracking, production estimates, and scheduling.
- **Astronomical and simulation tools** – provide precise solar positions for rendering and sky models.
- **Geospatial processing** – integrate into GIS or ETL pipelines via command-line streaming and CSV/JSON output.

## Requirements and installation

Download the latest release binary from the [releases page](https://github.com/klausbrunner/sunce/releases/latest) or install from source if you have a Rust toolchain:

```shell
cargo install sunce
```

Native executables are provided for Linux, macOS, and Windows.

## Quick start

```bash
# Getting today's sunrise and sunset in Madrid (UTC)
sunce 40.42 -3.70 now --timezone=UTC sunrise

# Sun position in Stockholm on 2026-01-15 at 12:30 CET
sunce 59.334 18.063 2026-01-15T12:30:00+01:00 position
```

### Example commands

```bash
# Time series: positions in Berlin every 10 minutes, CSV output, with delta-T estimate
sunce --format=CSV --deltat --timezone=Europe/Berlin 52.522 13.413 2023-03-26 position --step=10m

# Geographic grid: positions across Central Europe at noon (1° resolution)
sunce --format=CSV 45.0:50.0:1.0 5.0:15.0:1.0 2026-06-21T12:00:00Z position

# Sunrise, sunset, and twilight times for Tokyo throughout March 2027, JSON output
sunce --format=JSON --timezone=Asia/Tokyo 35.68 139.69 2027-03 sunrise --twilight
```

## File input and streaming

`sunce` accepts file input for coordinates and times and supports stdin streaming via the `@-` syntax. This is useful when composing pipelines or when input is generated programmatically.

Input modes:

- **Coordinate files:** pass `@coords.txt` as the latitude parameter to read coordinates from a file. Each line contains a latitude and longitude (space- or comma-separated).
- **Time files:** pass `@times.txt` as the date/time parameter to read timestamps from a file, one timestamp per line.
- **Paired data files:** pass `@data.txt` to provide explicit `latitude longitude datetime` records on each line; paired input is treated as one record per line with no cartesian expansion.
- **Stdin:** use `@-` in place of a filename to read the corresponding parameter from standard input. Only one parameter may read from stdin at a time.

Examples:

```bash
# Pipe a single paired record from stdin
echo "52.0,25.0,2023-06-21T12:00:00" | sunce @- position

# Stream coordinate pairs from stdin and evaluate for a fixed time
cat coords.txt | sunce @- 2023-06-21T12:00:00 position

# Generate timestamps and pipe them in for a single location
generate-times | sunce 52.0 25.0 @- position
```

Files may include blank lines and comments (lines starting with `#`). Both space-separated and CSV style are accepted.

## Time series and geographic sweeps

- **Time ranges:** pass a year (e.g., `2026`) or year-month (`2026-06`) to obtain a daily series for that period when using the `sunrise` command. The `position` command produces per-step samples for the period or day specified; the step is controlled with `--step` (default 1 hour).
- **Geographic ranges:** use `start:end:step` syntax for latitude and/or longitude to define a grid (e.g., `40.0:45.0:0.5`). Geographic sweeps combine with time series to produce spatio-temporal datasets.

## Output formats

- `human` (default) – readable text for quick checks.
- `csv` – comma-separated values with headers by default; use `--no-headers` to omit them.
- `json` – JSON Lines (one JSON object per line) for streaming and line-oriented processing.

## Key options

- `--timezone=<tz>` – timezone as an offset (e.g., `+01:00`) or a TZ database name (e.g., `Europe/Berlin`).
- `--deltat[=<seconds>]` – specify delta-T explicitly, or provide the option without value to request an automatic estimate. For background on delta-T see [solar-positioning](https://crates.io/crates/solar-positioning).
- `--format=<format>` – output format: `human`, `csv`, or `json`.
- `--[no-]headers` – include/omit header row for CSV output (default: headers on).
- `--[no-]show-inputs` – include input parameters in the output.
- `--step=<seconds>` – time step for `position` time series sampling.

Run `sunce help` or `sunce help <command>` for the full reference.

## Performance

`sunce` is designed for high throughput with constant memory usage. The streaming architecture handles infinite coordinate ranges and time series without memory growth.

## License

This project is distributed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Contributing

Please open issues or pull requests for bugs, documentation improvements, and feature requests. Include command-line examples and expected output when reporting problems.

Commit message:

feat: watch mode, shell completions

README.md, after:

# sunce

`sunce` is a command-line application for computing topocentric solar coordinates and solar events such as sunrise, sunset, transit, and twilight. It is designed for scripting and bulk processing: the tool supports time series, geographic sweeps, file input, and streaming, and produces machine-friendly output (CSV or JSON Lines) for use in data pipelines. Built on the [solar-positioning](https://crates.io/crates/solar-positioning) library of high-accuracy solar position algorithms.

## Status

This project aims to be a drop-in replacement for the Java-based [solarpos](https://github.com/klausbrunner/solarpos) tool while benefiting from Rust's performance and distribution advantages. While the core functionality is stable and extensively tested with compatibility validation against solarpos, the tool hasn't seen much user testing yet.

## Use cases

- **Solar-energy operations** – compute sun angles and event times for panel tracking, production estimates, and scheduling.
- **Astronomical and simulation tools** – provide precise solar positions for rendering and sky models.
- **Geospatial processing** – integrate into GIS or ETL pipelines via command-line streaming and CSV/JSON output.

## Requirements and installation

Download the latest release binary from the [releases page](https://github.com/klausbrunner/sunce/releases/latest) or install from source if you have a Rust toolchain:

```shell
cargo install sunce
```

Native executables are provided for Linux, macOS, and Windows.

## Quick start

```bash
# Getting today's sunrise and sunset in Madrid (UTC)
sunce 40.42 -3.70 now --timezone=UTC sunrise

# Sun position in Stockholm on 2026-01-15 at 12:30 CET
sunce 59.334 18.063 2026-01-15T12:30:00+01:00 position
```

### Example commands

```bash
# Time series: positions in Berlin every 10 minutes, CSV output, with delta-T estimate
sunce --format=CSV --deltat --timezone=Europe/Berlin 52.522 13.413 2023-03-26 position --step=10m

# Geographic grid: positions across Central Europe at noon (1° resolution)
sunce --format=CSV 45.0:50.0:1.0 5.0:15.0:1.0 2026-06-21T12:00:00Z position

# Sunrise, sunset, and twilight times for Tokyo throughout March 2027, JSON output
sunce --format=JSON --timezone=Asia/Tokyo 35.68 139.69 2027-03 sunrise --twilight
```

## File input and streaming

`sunce` accepts file input for coordinates and times and supports stdin streaming via the `@-` syntax. This is useful when composing pipelines or when input is generated programmatically.

Input modes:

- **Coordinate files:** pass `@coords.txt` as the latitude parameter to read coordinates from a file. Each line contains a latitude and longitude (space- or comma-separated).
- **Time files:** pass `@times.txt` as the date/time parameter to read timestamps from a file, one timestamp per line.
- **Paired data files:** pass `@data.txt` to provide explicit `latitude longitude datetime` records on each line; paired input is treated as one record per line with no cartesian expansion.
- **Stdin:** use `@-` in place of a filename to read the corresponding parameter from standard input. Only one parameter may read from stdin at a time.

Examples:

```bash
# Pipe a single paired record from stdin
echo "52.0,25.0,2023-06-21T12:00:00" | sunce @- position

# Stream coordinate pairs from stdin and evaluate for a fixed time
cat coords.txt | sunce @- 2023-06-21T12:00:00 position

# Generate timestamps and pipe them in for a single location
generate-times | sunce 52.0 25.0 @- position
```

Files may include blank lines and comments (lines starting with `#`). Both space-separated and CSV style are accepted.

## Time series and geographic sweeps

- **Time ranges:** pass a year (e.g., `2026`) or year-month (`2026-06`) to obtain a daily series for that period when using the `sunrise` command. The `position` command produces per-step samples for the period or day specified; the step is controlled with `--step` (default 1 hour).
- **Geographic ranges:** use `start:end:step` syntax for latitude and/or longitude to define a grid (e.g., `40.0:45.0:0.5`). Geographic sweeps combine with time series to produce spatio-temporal datasets.
- **Watch mode:** combine `now` with `--step` to periodically track sun position in real-time (e.g., `sunce 52.5 13.4 now position --step=1s` updates every second). Press Ctrl+C to stop.

## Output formats

- `human` (default) – readable text for quick checks.
- `csv` – comma-separated values with headers by default; use `--no-headers` to omit them.
- `json` – JSON Lines (one JSON object per line) for streaming and line-oriented processing.

## Key options

- `--timezone=<tz>` – timezone as an offset (e.g., `+01:00`) or a TZ database name (e.g., `Europe/Berlin`).
- `--deltat[=<seconds>]` – specify delta-T explicitly, or provide the option without value to request an automatic estimate. For background on delta-T see [solar-positioning](https://crates.io/crates/solar-positioning).
- `--format=<format>` – output format: `human`, `csv`, or `json`.
- `--[no-]headers` – include/omit header row for CSV output (default: headers on).
- `--[no-]show-inputs` – include input parameters in the output.
- `--step=<seconds>` – time step for `position` time series sampling.

Run `sunce help` or `sunce help <command>` for the full reference.

## Performance

`sunce` is designed for high throughput with constant memory usage. The streaming architecture handles infinite coordinate ranges and time series without memory growth.

## License

This project is distributed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## Contributing

Please open issues or pull requests for bugs, documentation improvements, and feature requests. Include command-line examples and expected output when reporting problems.
